Several	 studies	 have	 been	 done	 on	 the	 psychological	 effects	 of	 random
rewards	on	monkeys.	For	 example,	if	you	teach	 a	monkey	to	do	 a	task	 and
consistently	reward	it	every	time	the	task	is	done,	the	monkey	quickly	learns
to	associate	a	specific	outcome	with	the	efforts.	If	you	stop	rewarding	it	for
doing	the	task,	within	a	very	short	period	of	time	the	monkey	will	simply	stop
doing	 the	 task.	 It	 won’t	 waste	 its	 energy	 doing	something	 that	 it	 has	 now
learned	it	won’t	be	rewarded	for.
However,	the	monkey’s	response	to	being	cut	off	from	the	reward	is	very
different	if	you	start	out	on	a	purely	random	schedule,	instead	of	a	consistent
one.	When	you	stop	offering	the	reward,	there’s	no	way	the	monkey	can	know
that	 it	 will	 never	 be	rewarded	 again	for	 doing	 that	 task.	Every	 time	 it	 was
rewarded	 in	 the	 past,	 the	reward	 came	 as	 a	surprise.	 As	 a	result,	from	 the
monkey’s	perspective,	there’s	no	reason	to	quit	doing	the	task.	The	monkey
keeps	on	doing	the	task,	even	without	being	rewarded	for	doing	it.	Some	will
continue	indefinitely.
I’m	 not	 sure	 why	 we’re	 susceptible	 to	 becoming	 addicted	 to	 random
rewards.	If	I	had	to	guess,	I	would	say	that	it	probably	has	something	to	do
with	the	euphoria-inducing	chemicals	that	are	released	in	our	brains	when	we
experience	an	unexpected,	pleasant	surprise.	If	a	reward	is	random,	we	never
know	 for	sure	 if	 and	 when	 we	 might	 receive	 it,	so	 expending	 energy	 and
resources	in	the	hope	of	experiencing	that	wonderful	feeling	of	surprise	again
isn’t	difficult.	In	fact,	for	many	people	it	can	be	very	addicting.	On	the	other
hand,	when	we	expect	a	particular	outcome	and	it	doesn’t	come	about,	we’re
disappointed	and	feel	bad.	If	we	do	it	again	and	get	the	same	disappointing
outcome,	it	isn’t	likely	that	we	will	keep	doing	something	we	know	will	cause
us	emotional	pain.
The	 problem	 with	 any	 addiction	 is	 that	 it	 leaves	 us	 in	 a	 state	 of
“choicelessness.”	 To	 whatever	 degree	 the	 addiction	 dominates	 our	state	 of
mind,	 to	 that	 same	 degree	 our	 focus	 and	 efforts	 will	 be	 geared	 toward
fulfilling	 the	 object	 of	 that	 addiction.	 Other	 possibilities	 that	 exist	 in	 any
given	moment	to	fulfill	other	needs	(like	the	need	to	trust	ourselves	and	not	to
subject	too	many	of	our	assets	to	risk)	are	either	ignored	or	dismissed.	We	feel
powerless	to	act	in	any	other	way	than	to	satisfy	the	addiction.	An	addiction
to	 random	 rewards	 is	 particularly	 troublesome	 for	 traders,	 because	 it	 is
another	 source	 of	 resistance	 to	 creating	 the	 kind	 of	 mental	 structure	 that
produces	consistency.
PROBLEM:
External	versus	Internal	Control
Our	 upbringing	 has	 programmed	 us	 to	 function	 in	 a	 social	 environment,
which	 means	 we’ve	 acquired	 certain	 thinking	 strategies	 for	 fulfilling	 our
needs,	wants	and	desires	that	are	geared	toward	social	interaction.	Not	only
have	 we	 learned	 to	 depend	 on	 each	 other	 to	 fulfill	 the	 needs,	 wants	 and
desires	 we	 cannot	fulfill	 completely	 on	 our	 own,	 but	 in	 the	 process	 we’ve
acquired	 many	 socially-based	 controlling	 and	 manipulating	 techniques	 for
assuring	that	other	people	behave	in	a	manner	that	is	consistent	with	what	we
want.
The	markets	may	seem	like	a	social	endeavor	because	there	are	so	many
people	 involved,	 but	 they’re	 not.	 If,	 in	 today’s	 modern	 society,	 we	 have
learned	 to	 depend	 on	 each	 other	 to	 fulfill	 basic	 needs,	 then	 the	 market
environment	(even	 though	 it	 exists	 in	 the	midst	 of	modern	society)	 can	 be
characterized	 as	 a	 psychological	 wilderness,	 where	 it’s	 truly	 every	 man	 or
woman	for	himself	or	herself.
Not	only	can	we	not	depend	on	the	market	to	do	anything	for	us,	but	it	is
extremely	difficult,	if	not	impossible,	to	manipulate	or	control	anything	that
the	market	does.	Now,	if	we’ve	become	effective	at	fulfilling	our	needs,	wants
and	desires	by	learning	how	to	control	and	manipulate	our	environment,	but
suddenly	find	 ourselves,	 as	 traders,	 in	 an	 environment	 that	 does	 not	 know,
care,	or	respond	to	anything	that	is	important	to	us,	where	does	that	leave	us?
You’re	right	if	you	said	up	the	proverbial	creek	without	a	paddle.
One	 of	 the	 principal	 reasons	 so	 many	 successful	 people	 have	 failed
miserably	at	trading	is	that	their	success	is	partly	attributable	to	their	superior
ability	to	manipulate	and	control	the	social	environment,	to	respond	to	what
they	want.	To	some	degree,	all	of	us	have	learned	or	developed	techniques	to
make	the	external	environment	conform	to	our	mental	(interior)	environment.
The	 problem	 is	 that	 none	 of	 these	 techniques	 work	 with	 the	 market.	 The
market	 doesn’t	 respond	 to	 control	 and	 manipulation	 (unless	 you’re	 a	 very
large	trader).
However,	 we	 can	 control	 our	 perception	 and	 interpretation	 of	 market
information,	 as	 well	 as	 our	 own	 behavior.	 Instead	 of	 controlling	 our
surroundings	so	they	conform	to	our	idea	of	the	way	things	should	be,	we	can
learn	to	control	ourselves.	Then	we	can	perceive	information	from	the	most
objective	perspective	possible,	and	structure	our	mental	environment	so	that
we	always	behave	in	a	manner	that	is	in	our	own	best	interest.
